README.md, before:

# Storage Performance Development Kit

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/spdk/spdk.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/spdk/spdk)

The Storage Performance Development Kit ([SPDK](http://www.spdk.io)) provides a set of tools
and libraries for writing high performance, scalable, user-mode storage
applications. It achieves high performance by moving all of the necessary
drivers into userspace and operating in a polled mode instead of relying on
interrupts, which avoids kernel context switches and eliminates interrupt
handling overhead.

The development kit currently includes:
* [NVMe driver](http://www.spdk.io/doc/nvme.html)
* [I/OAT (DMA engine) driver](http://www.spdk.io/doc/ioat.html)
* [NVMe over Fabrics target](http://www.spdk.io/doc/nvmf.html)
* [iSCSI target](http://www.spdk.io/doc/iscsi.html)
* [vhost target](http://www.spdk.io/doc/vhost.html)
* [Virtio-SCSI driver](http://www.spdk.io/doc/virtio.html)

# In this readme:

* [Documentation](#documentation)
* [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
* [Source Code](#source)
* [Build](#libraries)
* [Unit Tests](#tests)
* [Vagrant](#vagrant)
* [Advanced Build Options](#advanced)
* [Hugepages and Device Binding](#huge)
* [Example Code](#examples)
* [Contributing](#contributing)

<a id="documentation"></a>
## Documentation

[Doxygen API documentation](http://www.spdk.io/doc/) is available, as
well as a [Porting Guide](http://www.spdk.io/doc/porting.html) for porting SPDK to different frameworks
and operating systems.

<a id="source"></a>
## Source Code

~~~{.sh}
git clone https://github.com/spdk/spdk
cd spdk
git submodule update --init
~~~

<a id="prerequisites"></a>
## Prerequisites

The dependencies can be installed automatically by `scripts/pkgdep.sh`.

~~~{.sh}
./scripts/pkgdep.sh
~~~

<a id="libraries"></a>
## Build

Linux:

~~~{.sh}
./configure
make
~~~

FreeBSD:
Note: Make sure you have the matching kernel source in /usr/src/ and
also note that CONFIG_COVERAGE option is not available right now
for FreeBSD builds.

~~~{.sh}
./configure
gmake
~~~

<a id="tests"></a>
## Unit Tests

~~~{.sh}
./test/unit/unittest.sh
~~~

You will see several error messages when running the unit tests, but they are
part of the test suite. The final message at the end of the script indicates
success or failure.

<a id="vagrant"></a>
## Vagrant

A [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/downloads.html) setup is also provided
to create a Linux VM with a virtual NVMe controller to get up and running
quickly.  Currently this has only been tested on MacOS and Ubuntu 16.04.2 LTS
with the [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads) provider.  The
[VirtualBox Extension Pack](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads) must
also be installed in order to get the required NVMe support.

Details on the Vagrant setup can be found in the
[SPDK Vagrant documentation](http://spdk.io/doc/vagrant.html).

<a id="advanced"></a>
## Advanced Build Options

Optional components and other build-time configuration are controlled by
settings in two Makefile fragments in the root of the repository. `CONFIG`
contains the base settings. Running the `configure` script generates a new
file, `CONFIG.local`, that contains overrides to the base `CONFIG` file. For
advanced configuration, there are a number of additional options to `configure`
that may be used, or `CONFIG.local` can simply be created and edited by hand. A
description of all possible options is located in `CONFIG`.

Boolean (on/off) options are configured with a 'y' (yes) or 'n' (no). For
example, this line of `CONFIG` controls whether the optional RDMA (libibverbs)
support is enabled:

	CONFIG_RDMA?=n

To enable RDMA, this line may be added to `CONFIG.local` with a 'y' instead of
'n'. For the majority of options this can be done using the `configure` script.
For example:

~~~{.sh}
./configure --with-rdma
~~~

Additionally, `CONFIG` options may also be overridden on the `make` command
line:

~~~{.sh}
make CONFIG_RDMA=y
~~~

Users may wish to use a version of DPDK different from the submodule included
in the SPDK repository.  Note, this includes the ability to build not only
from DPDK sources, but also just with the includes and libraries
installed via the dpdk and dpdk-devel packages.  To specify an alternate DPDK
installation, run configure with the --with-dpdk option.  For example:

Linux:

~~~{.sh}
./configure --with-dpdk=/path/to/dpdk/x86_64-native-linuxapp-gcc
make
~~~

FreeBSD:

~~~{.sh}
./configure --with-dpdk=/path/to/dpdk/x86_64-native-bsdapp-clang
gmake
~~~

The options specified on the `make` command line take precedence over the
default values in `CONFIG` and `CONFIG.local`. This can be useful if you, for
example, generate a `CONFIG.local` using the `configure` script and then have
one or two options (i.e. debug builds) that you wish to turn on and off
frequently.

<a id="huge"></a>
## Hugepages and Device Binding

Before running an SPDK application, some hugepages must be allocated and
any NVMe and I/OAT devices must be unbound from the native kernel drivers.
SPDK includes a script to automate this process on both Linux and FreeBSD.
This script should be run as root.

~~~{.sh}
sudo scripts/setup.sh
~~~

Users may wish to configure a specific memory size. Below is an example of
configuring 8192MB memory.

~~~{.sh}
sudo HUGEMEM=8192 scripts/setup.sh
~~~

<a id="examples"></a>
## Example Code

Example code is located in the examples directory. The examples are compiled
automatically as part of the build process. Simply call any of the examples
with no arguments to see the help output. You'll likely need to run the examples
as a privileged user (root) unless you've done additional configuration
to grant your user permission to allocate huge pages and map devices through
vfio.

<a id="contributing"></a>
## Contributing

For additional details on how to get more involved in the community, including
[contributing code](http://www.spdk.io/development) and participating in discussions and other activities, please
refer to [spdk.io](http://www.spdk.io/community)

Commit message:

configure: use mk/config.mk instead of CONFIG.local
We have hairy configuration method. First configure script uses CONFIG,
environment and arguments to produce CONFIG.local and config.h then
makefile uses CONFIG, environment and CONFIG.local to produce config.h
again. First time config.h can't be generated reliably as config.h
target in Makefile is passing MAKEFLAGS and they are unknown at
configuration phase.

Lets remove this mess by producing final mk/config.mk file and get rid
of CONFIG.local. This will also generate full build configuration in one
file instead scattering them in CONFIG and CONFIG.local.
In next patch scripts/genconfig.py can be removed.

Change-Id: I5696813312edff7e493207f7aa8569234a365ec0
Signed-off-by: Pawel Wodkowski <pawelx.wodkowski@intel.com>
Reviewed-on: https://review.gerrithub.io/426364
Chandler-Test-Pool: SPDK Automated Test System <sys_sgsw@intel.com>
Tested-by: SPDK CI Jenkins <sys_sgci@intel.com>
Reviewed-by: Jim Harris <james.r.harris@intel.com>
Reviewed-by: Ben Walker <benjamin.walker@intel.com>
Reviewed-by: Darek Stojaczyk <dariusz.stojaczyk@intel.com>

README.md, after:

# Storage Performance Development Kit

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/spdk/spdk.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/spdk/spdk)

The Storage Performance Development Kit ([SPDK](http://www.spdk.io)) provides a set of tools
and libraries for writing high performance, scalable, user-mode storage
applications. It achieves high performance by moving all of the necessary
drivers into userspace and operating in a polled mode instead of relying on
interrupts, which avoids kernel context switches and eliminates interrupt
handling overhead.

The development kit currently includes:
* [NVMe driver](http://www.spdk.io/doc/nvme.html)
* [I/OAT (DMA engine) driver](http://www.spdk.io/doc/ioat.html)
* [NVMe over Fabrics target](http://www.spdk.io/doc/nvmf.html)
* [iSCSI target](http://www.spdk.io/doc/iscsi.html)
* [vhost target](http://www.spdk.io/doc/vhost.html)
* [Virtio-SCSI driver](http://www.spdk.io/doc/virtio.html)

# In this readme:

* [Documentation](#documentation)
* [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
* [Source Code](#source)
* [Build](#libraries)
* [Unit Tests](#tests)
* [Vagrant](#vagrant)
* [Advanced Build Options](#advanced)
* [Hugepages and Device Binding](#huge)
* [Example Code](#examples)
* [Contributing](#contributing)

<a id="documentation"></a>
## Documentation

[Doxygen API documentation](http://www.spdk.io/doc/) is available, as
well as a [Porting Guide](http://www.spdk.io/doc/porting.html) for porting SPDK to different frameworks
and operating systems.

<a id="source"></a>
## Source Code

~~~{.sh}
git clone https://github.com/spdk/spdk
cd spdk
git submodule update --init
~~~

<a id="prerequisites"></a>
## Prerequisites

The dependencies can be installed automatically by `scripts/pkgdep.sh`.

~~~{.sh}
./scripts/pkgdep.sh
~~~

<a id="libraries"></a>
## Build

Linux:

~~~{.sh}
./configure
make
~~~

FreeBSD:
Note: Make sure you have the matching kernel source in /usr/src/ and
also note that CONFIG_COVERAGE option is not available right now
for FreeBSD builds.

~~~{.sh}
./configure
gmake
~~~

<a id="tests"></a>
## Unit Tests

~~~{.sh}
./test/unit/unittest.sh
~~~

You will see several error messages when running the unit tests, but they are
part of the test suite. The final message at the end of the script indicates
success or failure.

<a id="vagrant"></a>
## Vagrant

A [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/downloads.html) setup is also provided
to create a Linux VM with a virtual NVMe controller to get up and running
quickly.  Currently this has only been tested on MacOS and Ubuntu 16.04.2 LTS
with the [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads) provider.  The
[VirtualBox Extension Pack](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads) must
also be installed in order to get the required NVMe support.

Details on the Vagrant setup can be found in the
[SPDK Vagrant documentation](http://spdk.io/doc/vagrant.html).

<a id="advanced"></a>
## Advanced Build Options

Optional components and other build-time configuration are controlled by
settings in the Makefile configuration file in the root of the repository. `CONFIG`
contains the base settings for the `configure` script. This script generates a new
file, `mk/config.mk`, that contains final build settings. For advanced configuration,
there are a number of additional options to `configure` that may be used, or
`mk/config.mk` can simply be created and edited by hand. A description of all
possible options is located in `CONFIG`.

Boolean (on/off) options are configured with a 'y' (yes) or 'n' (no). For
example, this line of `CONFIG` controls whether the optional RDMA (libibverbs)
support is enabled:

	CONFIG_RDMA?=n

To enable RDMA, this line may be added to `mk/config.mk` with a 'y' instead of
'n'. For the majority of options this can be done using the `configure` script.
For example:

~~~{.sh}
./configure --with-rdma
~~~

Additionally, `CONFIG` options may also be overridden on the `make` command
line:

~~~{.sh}
make CONFIG_RDMA=y
~~~

Users may wish to use a version of DPDK different from the submodule included
in the SPDK repository.  Note, this includes the ability to build not only
from DPDK sources, but also just with the includes and libraries
installed via the dpdk and dpdk-devel packages.  To specify an alternate DPDK
installation, run configure with the --with-dpdk option.  For example:

Linux:

~~~{.sh}
./configure --with-dpdk=/path/to/dpdk/x86_64-native-linuxapp-gcc
make
~~~

FreeBSD:

~~~{.sh}
./configure --with-dpdk=/path/to/dpdk/x86_64-native-bsdapp-clang
gmake
~~~

The options specified on the `make` command line take precedence over the
values in `mk/config.mk`. This can be useful if you, for example, generate
a `mk/config.mk` using the `configure` script and then have one or two
options (i.e. debug builds) that you wish to turn on and off frequently.

<a id="huge"></a>
## Hugepages and Device Binding

Before running an SPDK application, some hugepages must be allocated and
any NVMe and I/OAT devices must be unbound from the native kernel drivers.
SPDK includes a script to automate this process on both Linux and FreeBSD.
This script should be run as root.

~~~{.sh}
sudo scripts/setup.sh
~~~

Users may wish to configure a specific memory size. Below is an example of
configuring 8192MB memory.

~~~{.sh}
sudo HUGEMEM=8192 scripts/setup.sh
~~~

<a id="examples"></a>
## Example Code

Example code is located in the examples directory. The examples are compiled
automatically as part of the build process. Simply call any of the examples
with no arguments to see the help output. You'll likely need to run the examples
as a privileged user (root) unless you've done additional configuration
to grant your user permission to allocate huge pages and map devices through
vfio.

<a id="contributing"></a>
## Contributing

For additional details on how to get more involved in the community, including
[contributing code](http://www.spdk.io/development) and participating in discussions and other activities, please
refer to [spdk.io](http://www.spdk.io/community)
